<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>
				<a id="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>" name="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>">CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>.</a>
			</h4>
			<h3>THE RETURN ON BOARD.</h3>
			<p>For two hours the tree floated on the immense lake without reaching <i>terra firma</i>. The flames had gradually died out, and thus the principal danger of this terrible voyage had vanished. The current, still keeping its original direction, flowed from southwest to northeast; the darkness, though illumined now and then by flashes, had become profound, and Paganel sought in vain for his bearings. But the storm was abating, the large drops of rain gave place to light spray that was scattered by the wind, while the huge distended clouds were crossed by light bands.</p>
			<p>The tree advanced rapidly on the impetuous torrent, gliding with surprising swiftness, as if some powerful propelling means were inclosed within its trunk. There was as yet no certainty that they would not float on thus for many days. About three o’clock in the morning, however, the major observed that the roots now and then struck the bottom. Tom Austin, by means of a long branch, carefully sounded, and declared that the water was growing shallow. Twenty minutes later, a shock was felt, and the progress of the tree was checked.</p>
			<p>“Land! land!” cried Paganel, in ringing tones.</p>
			<p>The ends of the charred branches had struck against a hillock on the ground, and never were navigators more delighted to land. Already Robert and Wilson, having reached a firm plateau, were uttering shouts of joy, when a well-known whistle was heard. The sound of a horse’s hoofs was heard upon the plain, and the tall form of the Indian emerged from the darkness.</p>
			<p>“Thalcave!” cried Robert.</p>
			<p>“Thalcave!” repeated his companions, as with one voice.</p>
			<p>“Friends!” said the Patagonian, who had waited for them there, knowing that the current would carry them as it had carried him.</p>
			<p>At the same moment he raised Robert in his arms and clasped him to his breast. Glenarvan, the major, and the sailors, delighted to see their faithful guide again, shook his hands with the most earnest cordiality. The Patagonian then conducted them to an abandoned estancia. Here a good fire was burning, which revived them, and on the coals were roasting succulent slices of venison, to which they did ample justice. And when their refreshed minds began to reflect, they could scarcely believe that they had escaped so many perils,⁠—the fire, the water, and the formidable alligators.</p>
			<p>Thalcave, in a few words, told his story to Paganel, and ascribed to his intrepid horse all the honor of having saved him. Paganel then endeavored to explain to him the new interpretation of the document, and the hopes it led them to entertain. Did the Indian understand the geographer’s ingenious suppositions? It was very doubtful; but he saw his friends happy and very confident, and he desired nothing more.</p>
			<p>It may be easily believed that these courageous travelers, after their day of rest on the tree, needed no urging to resume their journey. At eight o’clock in the morning they were ready to start. They were too far south to procure means of transport, and were therefore obliged to travel on foot. The distance, however, was only forty miles, and Thaouka would not refuse to carry from time to time a tired pedestrian. In thirty-six hours they would reach the shores of the Atlantic.</p>
			<header><p>IN THE DARK.</p></header>
			<p>As soon as refreshed the guide and his companions left behind them the immense basin, still covered with the waters, and proceeded across elevated plains, on which, here and there, were seen groves planted by Europeans, meadows, and occasionally native trees. Thus the day passed.</p>
			<p>The next morning, fifteen miles before reaching the ocean, its proximity was perceptible. They hastened on in order to reach Lake Salado, on the shores of the Atlantic, the same day. They were beginning to feel fatigued, when they perceived sand-hills that hid the foaming waves, and soon the prolonged murmur of the rising tide struck upon their ears.</p>
			<p>“The ocean!” cried Paganel.</p>
			<p>“Yes, the ocean!” replied Thalcave.</p>
			<p>And these wanderers, whose strength had seemed almost about to fail, climbed the mounds with wonderful agility. But the darkness was profound, and their eyes wandered in vain over the gloomy expanse. They looked for the Duncan, but could not discern her.</p>
			<p>“She is there, at all events,” said Glenarvan, “waiting for us.”</p>
			<p>“We shall see her to-morrow,” replied MacNabb.</p>
			<p>Tom Austin shouted seaward, but received no answer. The wind was very strong, and the sea tempestuous. The clouds were driving from the west, and the foaming crests of the waves broke over the beach in masses of spray. If the Duncan was at the appointed rendezvous, the lookout man could neither hear nor be heard. The coast afforded no shelter. There was no bay, no harbor, no cove; not even a creek. The beach consisted of long sand-banks that were lost in the sea, and the vicinity of which is more dangerous than that of the rocks in the face of wind and tide. These banks, in fact, increase the waves; the sea is peculiarly boisterous around them, and ships are sure to be lost if they strike on these bars in heavy storms.</p>
			<p>It was therefore very natural that the Duncan, considering this coast dangerous, and knowing it to be without a port of shelter, kept at a distance. Captain Mangles must have kept to the windward as far as possible. This was Tom Austin’s opinion, and he declared that the Duncan was not less than five miles at sea.</p>
			<p>The major, accordingly, persuaded his impatient relative to be resigned, as there was no way of dissipating the thick darkness. And why weary their eyes in scanning the gloomy horizon? He established a kind of encampment in the shelter of the sand-hills; the remains of the provisions furnished them a final repast; and then each, following the major’s example, hollowed out a comfortable bed in the sand, and, covering himself up to his chin, was soon wrapped in profound repose.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan watched alone. The wind continued strong, and the ocean still showed the effects of the recent storm. The tumultuous waves broke at the foot of the sand-banks with the noise of thunder. Glenarvan could not convince himself that the Duncan was so near him; but as for supposing that she had not arrived at her appointed rendezvous, it was impossible, for such a ship there were no delays. The storm had certainly been violent and its fury terrible on the vast expanse of the ocean, but the yacht was a good vessel and her captain an able seaman; she must, therefore, be at her destination.</p>
			<p>These reflections, however, did not pacify Glenarvan. When heart and reason are at variance, the latter is the weaker power. The lord of Malcolm Castle seemed to see in the darkness all those whom he loved, his dear Helena, Mary Grant, and the crew of the Duncan. He wandered along the barren coast which the waves covered with phosphorescent bubbles. He looked, he listened, and even thought that he saw a fitful light on the sea.</p>
			<p>“I am not mistaken,” he soliloquized; “I saw a ship’s light, the Duncan’s. Ah! why cannot my eyes pierce the darkness?”</p>
			<p>Then an idea occurred to him. Paganel called himself a nyctalops; he could see in the night.</p>
			<p>The geographer was sleeping like a mole in his bed, when a strong hand dragged him from his sandy couch.</p>
			<p>“Who is that?” cried he.</p>
			<p>“I.”</p>
			<p>“Who?”</p>
			<p>“Glenarvan. Come, I need your eyes.”</p>
			<p>“My eyes?” replied Paganel, rubbing them vigorously.</p>
			<p>“Yes, your eyes, to distinguish the Duncan in this darkness. Come.”</p>
			<p>“And why my eyes?” said Paganel to himself, delighted, nevertheless, to be of service to Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>He rose, shaking his torpid limbs in the manner of one awakened from sleep, and followed his friend along the shore. Glenarvan requested him to survey the dark horizon to seaward. For several moments Paganel conscientiously devoted himself to this task.</p>
			<p>“Well, do you perceive nothing?” asked Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Nothing. Not even a cat could see two paces before her.”</p>
			<p>“Look for a red or a green light, on the starboard or the larboard side.”</p>
			<p>“I see neither a red nor a green light. All is darkness,” replied Paganel, whose eyes were thereupon involuntarily closed.</p>
			<p>For half an hour he mechanically followed his impatient friend in absolute silence, with his head bowed upon his breast, sometimes raising it suddenly. He tottered along with uncertain steps, like those of a drunken man. At last Glenarvan, seeing that the geographer was in a state of somnambulism, took him by the arm, and, without waking him, led him back to his sand-hole, and comfortably deposited him therein.</p>
			<p>At break of day they were all started to their feet by the cry,⁠—</p>
			<header><p>IMPATIENCE.</p></header>
			<p>“The Duncan! the Duncan!”</p>
			<p>“Hurrah! hurrah!” replied Glenarvan’s companions, rushing to the shore.</p>
			<p>The Duncan was indeed in sight. Five miles distant, the yacht was sailing under low pressure, her main-sails carefully reefed, while her smoke mingled with the mists of the morning. The sea was high, and a vessel of her tonnage could not approach the shore without danger.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan, provided with Paganel’s telescope, watched the movements of the Duncan. Captain Mangles could not have perceived them, for he did not approach, but continued to coast along with only a reefed top-sail.</p>
			<p>At this moment Thalcave, having loaded his carbine heavily, fired it in the direction of the yacht. They gazed and listened. Three times the Indian’s gun resounded, waking the echoes of the shore.</p>
			<p>At last a white smoke issued from the side of the yacht.</p>
			<p>“They see us!” cried Glenarvan. “It is the Duncan’s cannon.”</p>
			<p>A few moments after, a heavy report rang out on the air, and the Duncan, shifting her sail and putting on steam, was seen to be approaching the shore. By the aid of the glass they saw a boat leave the ship’s side.</p>
			<p>“Lady Helena cannot come,” said Tom Austin: “the sea is too rough.”</p>
			<p>“Nor Captain Mangles,” replied MacNabb: “he cannot leave his vessel.”</p>
			<p>“My sister! my sister!” cried Robert, stretching his arms towards the yacht, which rolled heavily.</p>
			<p>“I hope I shall soon get on board!” exclaimed Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Patience, Edward! You will be there in two hours,” replied MacNabb.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan now joined Thalcave, who, standing with folded arms alongside of Thaouka, was calmly gazing at the waves.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan took his hand, and, pointing to the yacht, said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Come!”</p>
			<p>The Indian shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Come, my friend!” continued Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Thalcave, gently. “Here is Thaouka, and there are the Pampas!” he added, indicating with a sweep of his hand the vast expanse of the plains.</p>
			<p>It was clear that the Indian would never leave the prairies, where the bones of his fathers whitened. Glenarvan knew the strong attachment of these children of the desert to their native country. He therefore shook Thalcave’s hand, and did not insist; not even when the Indian, smiling in his peculiar way, refused the price of his services, saying,⁠—</p>
			<p>“It was done out of friendship.”</p>
			<p>His lordship, however, desired to give the brave Indian something which might at least serve as a souvenir of his European friends. But what had he left? His arms, his horses, everything had been lost in the inundation. His friends were no richer than himself. For some moments he was at a loss how to repay the disinterested generosity of the brave guide; but at last a happy idea occurred to him. He drew from his pocket-book a costly medallion inclosing an admirable portrait, one of Lawrence’s master-pieces, and presented it to Thalcave.</p>
			<p>“My wife,” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>Thalcave gazed with wonder at the portrait, and pronounced these simple words,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Good and beautiful!”</p>
			<p>Then Robert, Paganel, the major, Tom Austin, and the two sailors bade an affectionate adieu to the noble Patagonian, who clasped each one in succession to his broad breast. All were sincerely sorry at parting with so courageous and devoted a friend. Paganel forced him to accept a map of South America and the two oceans, which the Indian had frequently examined with interest. It was the geographer’s most precious possession. As for Robert, he had nothing to give but caresses, which he freely lavished upon his deliverer and upon Thaouka.</p>
			<p>At that instant the Duncan’s boat approached, and, gliding into the narrow channel between the sand-banks, grounded on the beach.</p>
			<p>“My wife?” asked Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“My sister?” cried Robert.</p>
			<p>“Lady Helena and Miss Grant await you on board,” replied the cockswain. “But we have not a moment to lose, my lord, for the tide is beginning to ebb.”</p>
			<p>The last acknowledgments were given, and Thalcave accompanied his friends to the boat. Just as Robert was about to embark, the Indian took him in his arms and gazed at him tenderly.</p>
			<p>“Now go,” said he; “you are a man!”</p>
			<p>“Adieu, my friend, adieu!” cried Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Shall we ever see each other again?” asked Paganel.</p>
			<p>“Who knows?” replied Thalcave, raising his arms towards heaven.</p>
			<p>They pushed off, and the boat was rapidly borne from the shore by the ebbing tide. For a long time the motionless outline of the Indian was seen through the foam of the waves. Then his tall form grew indistinct, and soon became invisible. An hour afterwards they reached the Duncan. Robert was the first to spring upon the deck, where he threw himself upon his sister’s neck, while the crew of the yacht filled the air with their joyous shouts.</p>
			<p>Thus had our travelers accomplished the journey across South America on a rigorously straight line. Neither mountains nor rivers had turned them aside from their course; and, although they were not forced to struggle against the evil designs of men, the relentless fury of the elements had often tested their generous intrepidity to its utmost powers of endurance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
