<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXX: A Hospitable Colonist</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Hospitable Colonist</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The captain’s first care was to secure anchorage. He moored the vessel in five fathoms of water. The bottom was good, a hard gravel, affording an excellent hold. There was no danger of drifting, or of stranding at low tide. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, after so many hours of peril, was now in a sort of creek sheltered by a high promontory from the fury of the wind.</p>
			<p>Lord Glenarvan shook the hand of the young captain, saying⁠—</p>
			<p>“Thanks, John!”</p>
			<p>And Captain Mangles felt himself fully rewarded by these simple words. Glenarvan kept to himself the secret of his anguish, and neither Lady Helena, Mary Grant, nor Robert suspected the magnitude of the perils they had just escaped.</p>
			<p>One important point remained to be settled. On what part of the coast had the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> been cast by the storm? How could she regain her prescribed course? How far were they from Cape Bernouilli? Such were the first questions addressed to the captain, who at once took his bearings and noted his observations on the map. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> had not deviated very far from her route. She was at Cape Catastrophe, on the southern coast of Australia, not three hundred miles from Cape Bernouilli.</p>
			<p>But could the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>’s injuries be repaired? This was the question to decide. The captain wished to know the extent of the damage. It was discovered, by diving, that a flange of the screw was bent and came in contact with the sternpost. Hence it was impossible for the screw to rotate. This injury was considered serious enough to necessitate going into dry-dock, which of course could not be done in their present locality.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan and the captain, after mature reflection, resolved that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> should follow the western shore, seeking traces of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>, should stop at Cape Bernouilli, where further information could be obtained, and then continue southward to Melbourne, where her injuries could be repaired; and, as soon as this was done, that she should cruise along the eastern shores to finish the search.</p>
			<p>This arrangement was approved, and Captain Mangles resolved to take advantage of the first favorable wind. He did not have to wait long. Towards evening the hurricane had entirely subsided, and a moderate breeze was blowing from the southwest. Preparations were made for getting under way; new sails were set, and at four o’clock in the morning the sailors heaved at the capstan, the anchor was weighed, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, with all sails set, cruised close to windward along the coast.</p>
			<p>They arrived at Cape Bernouilli without finding the least trace of the lost vessel. But this failure proved nothing. Indeed, during the two years since the shipwreck, the sea might have scattered or destroyed the fragments of the brig. Besides, the natives, who scent shipwrecks as a vulture does a corpse, might have carried away every vestige of it. Harry Grant and his two companions, therefore, without doubt, had been taken prisoners the moment the waves cast them ashore, and been carried into the interior of the country.</p>
			<p>But here one of Paganel’s ingenious suppositions failed. So long as they were in the Argentine territory, the geographer could rightly maintain that the latitude of the document referred to the place of captivity⁠—not to the scene of the shipwreck. Indeed, the great rivers of the Pampas and their numerous affluents could easily bear the document to the sea. In this part of Australia, on the contrary, few streams cross the thirty-seventh parallel, and the principal Australian rivers⁠—the Murray, the Yara, the Torrens, and the Darling⁠—either flow into each other, or empty into the ocean by mouths where navigation is active. What probability was there, then, that a fragile bottle could have descended these continually navigated waters, and reached the Indian Ocean? This consideration could not escape such sagacious minds. Paganel’s supposition, plausible in Patagonia, was illogical in Australia. The geographer perceived this in a discussion on the subject with the major. It was clear that the latitude applied only to the place of shipwreck, and that consequently the bottle had been cast into the sea where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i> was wrecked⁠—on the western coast of Australia.</p>
			<p>However, as Glenarvan justly observed, this interpretation did not preclude the possibility of Captain Grant’s captivity, who, moreover, had intimated as much by the words “where they will be prisoners of the cruel Indians.” But there was no more reason for seeking the prisoners on the thirty-seventh parallel than on any other.</p>
			<p>This conclusion, after much discussion, was finally accepted, and it was decided that, if no traces of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i> were found at Cape Bernouilli, Lord Glenarvan should return to Europe, relinquishing all hope of finding the object of their search.</p>
			<p>This resolution occasioned profound grief to the children of the lost captain. As the boats containing the whole of the party were rowed ashore, they felt that the fate of their father would soon be probably decided; irrevocably, we may say, for Paganel, in a former discussion, had clearly demonstrated that the shipwrecked seamen would have reached their country long ago, if their vessel had stranded on the other, the eastern coast.</p>
			<p>“Hope! hope! never cease to hope!” said Lady Helena to the young girl seated beside her, as they approached the shore. “The hand of God will never fail us.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Miss Mary,” said the captain; “when men have exhausted human resources, then Heaven interposes, and, by some unforeseen event, opens to them new ways.”</p>
			<p>“God grant it, captain!” replied Mary.</p>
			<p>The shore was now only a cable’s length distant. The cape terminated in gentle declivities extending far out into the sea. The boat entered a small creek, between banks of coral in process of formation, which in time would form a chain of reefs along the southern coast of the island.</p>
			<p>The passengers of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> disembarked on a perfectly barren shore. Steep cliffs formed a lofty seawall, and it would have been difficult to scale this natural rampart without ladders or cramping-irons. Fortunately, the captain discovered a breach half a mile southward, caused by a partial crumbling of the cliffs. Probably the sea, during violent equinoctial storms, had beaten against this fragile barrier, and thus caused the fall of the upper portions of the mass.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan and his companions entered this opening, and reached the summit of the cliffs by a very steep ascent. Robert climbed an abrupt declivity with the agility of a cat, and arrived first at the top, to the great chagrin of Paganel, who was quite mortified at seeing himself outstripped by a mere lad of twelve. However, he distanced the peaceable major; but that worthy was utterly indifferent to his defeat.</p>
			<p>The little party surveyed the plain that stretched out beneath them. It was a vast, uncultivated tract, covered with bushes and brushwood, and was compared by Glenarvan to the glens of the Scottish lowlands, and by Paganel to the barren lands of Brittany. But though the country along the coast was evidently uninhabited, the presence of man, not the savage, but the civilized worker, was betokened by several substantial structures in the distance.</p>
			<p>“A mill!” cried Robert.</p>
			<p>True enough, at no great distance apparently, the sails of a mill were seen.</p>
			<p>“It is indeed a mill,” replied Paganel. “Here is a beacon as modest as it is useful, the sight of which delights my eyes.”</p>
			<p>“It is almost a belfry,” said Lady Helena.</p>
			<p>“Yes, madam; and while one makes bread for the body, the other announces bread for the soul. In this respect they resemble each other.”</p>
			<p>“Let us go to the mill,” replied Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>They accordingly started. After half an hour’s walk the soil assumed a new aspect. The transition from barren plains to cultivated fields was sudden. Instead of brushwood, quick-set hedges surrounded an inclosure freshly ploughed. Some cattle, and half a dozen horses, grazed in pastures encircled by acacias. Then fields of corn were reached, several acres of land bristling with the yellow ears, haycocks like great beehives, vineyards with blooming inclosures, a beautiful garden, where the useful and the ornamental mingled; in short, a fair and comfortable locality, which the merry mill crowned with its pointed gable and caressed with the moving shadow of its sails.</p>
			<p>At this moment a man of about fifty, of prepossessing countenance, issued from the principal house, at the barking of three great dogs that announced the coming of the strangers. Five stout and handsome boys, his sons, accompanied by their mother, a tall, robust woman, followed him. This man, surrounded by his healthful family, in the midst of these new erections, in this almost virgin country, presented the perfect type of the colonist, who, endeavoring to better his lot, seeks his fortune and happiness beyond the seas.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan and his friends had not yet introduced themselves, they had not had time to declare either their names or their rank, when these cordial words saluted them:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Strangers, welcome to the house of Patrick O’Moore.”</p>
			<p>“You are an Irishman?” said Glenarvan, taking the hand that the colonist offered him.</p>
			<p>“I was,” replied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> O’Moore. “Now I am an Australian. But come in, whoever you are, gentlemen; this house is at your service.”</p>
			<p>The invitation so hospitably given was accepted without ceremony. Lady Helena and Mary Grant, conducted by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> O’Moore, entered the house, while the colonist’s sons relieved the visitors of their firearms.</p>
			<p>A large, cool, airy room occupied the ground-floor of the house, which was built of stout beams arranged horizontally. Several wooden benches, built into the walls, and painted in gay colors, ten stools, two oaken trunks, in which white china and jugs of polished pewter were arranged, and a long table, at which twenty people could be comfortably seated, constituted the furniture, worthy of the house and its hardy inhabitants.</p>
			<p>Dinner was soon served. Dishes of soup smoked between roast beef and legs of mutton, flanked by large plates of olives, grapes, and oranges. The host and hostess had such an engaging air, and the fare was so tempting, so ample, and so abundantly furnished, that it would have been unbecoming not to accept this rural bounty. The domestics of the farm, the equals of their master, had already come to partake of the repast; and the host reserved the place of honor for the strangers.</p>
			<p>“I expected you,” said he, quietly, to Lord Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“You did?” replied the latter, very much surprised.</p>
			<p>“I always expect those who are coming,” replied the Irishman.</p>
			<p>Then, in a grave voice, while his household stood respectfully, he invoked a Divine blessing. Lady Helena was much affected by his perfect simplicity of manner, and a look from her husband told her that he likewise was touched by it.</p>
			<p>Ample justice was done to the repast. The conversation was general. The colonist told his story. It was like that of most deserving and voluntary emigrants. Many go far to seek their fortunes, and find only sorrow and disaster; they accuse fate, forgetting to blame their ignorance, laziness, and vices. The man who is sober and persevering, economical and honest, is almost sure to succeed.</p>
			<p>This had been the case with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> O’Moore. He had left Dundalk, where he was poor, and, emigrating with his family to Australia, had landed at Adelaide. At first he engaged in mining, but soon relinquished this for the less hazardous pursuits of the farmer, in which he had been successful beyond his highest anticipations. His agricultural knowledge was a great aid to him. He economized, and bought new lands with the profits of the first. His family flourished, as well as his farm. The Irish peasant had become a landed proprietor, and, although his establishment was only two years old, he owned at that moment five hundred acres of well-cultivated land and five hundred head of cattle, was his own master, and as independent as one can be even in the freest country in the world.</p>
			<p>His guests congratulated him sincerely when his story was finished. He doubtless expected a similar confidence, but did not urge it. Glenarvan had an immediate interest in speaking of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, of his own presence at Cape Bernouilli, and of the search that they had pursued so perseveringly. But, like a man who considers the main object in view, he first questioned his host concerning the shipwreck of the<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>.</p>
			<p>The Irishman’s answer was not cheering. He had never heard of the ship. No vessel had for some time been lost on the coast; and, as the shipwreck had occurred only two years before, he could affirm with absolute certainty that the sailors had not been cast on that part of the western shore.</p>
			<p>“And now, my lord,” added he, “may I be allowed to ask why you have inquired of me concerning this shipwreck?”</p>
			<p>Glenarvan then told the story of the document, the voyage of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, and the attempts made to find Captain Grant. He confessed that his dearest hopes had been destroyed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> O’Moore’s discouraging information, and that he now despaired of ever finding the shipwrecked seamen of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>.</p>
			<p>These words produced a gloomy impression upon his hearers. Robert and Mary listened to them with tearful eyes. Paganel could not find a word of consolation or hope. Captain Mangles suffered a grief that he could not subdue. Despair was seizing upon the souls of the noble people whom the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> had vainly brought to these distant shores, when all at once a voice was heard:⁠—</p>
			<p>“My lord, praise and thank God! If Captain Grant is living, he is in Australia.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
