<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup><h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2><h3 epub:type="title">The Departure of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i></h3></hgroup>
			<p>It has been already said that Lady Helena had a brave and generous soul. What she had just done was an undeniable proof of it, and Lord Glenarvan had good reason to trust in this noble woman, who was capable of comprehending and following him. The idea of sailing to the rescue of Captain Grant had already taken possession of him when he saw his petition rejected at London; but he could not have thought of separating from her. Yet, since she desired to go herself, all hesitation was at an end. The servants of the castle had received her proposal with cries of joy; the safety of their brother Scots was at stake, and Lord Glenarvan joined heartily in the hurrahs that greeted the lady of Luss.</p>
			<p>The scheme once resolved upon, there was not an hour to lose. That very day Lord Glenarvan sent to Captain Mangles orders to bring the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> to Glasgow, and make every preparation for a voyage to the South Seas, which might become one of circumnavigation. Moreover, in her plans Lady Helena had not overestimated the qualities of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>: of first-class construction with regard to strength and swiftness, she could without injury sustain a long voyage.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was a steam yacht of one hundred and ten tons burden. She had two masts,⁠—a foremast with foresail, mainsail, foretop and foretop-gallant sails; and a mainmast, carrying a mainsail and fore-staff. Her rigging was, therefore, sufficient, and she could profit by the wind like a simple clipper; but she relied especially upon her mechanical power. Her engine was of an effective force of one hundred and sixty horse power, and was constructed on a new plan. It possessed apparatus for overheating, which gave its steam a very great tension. It was a high-pressure engine, and produced motion by a double screw. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> under full steam could acquire a speed equal to any vessel of that day. Indeed, during her trial trip in the Frith of Clyde, she had made, according to the log, seventeen knots an hour. She was, therefore, fully capable of circumnavigating the world; and her captain had only to occupy himself with the internal arrangement.</p>
			<p>His first care was to increase his storeroom, and take in the greatest possible quantity of coal, for it would be difficult to renew their supplies on the voyage. The same precaution was taken with the steward’s room, and provisions for two years were stowed away. Money, of course, was not wanting, and a pivot-gun was furnished, which was fixed at the forecastle. You do not know what may happen, and it is always best to have the means of defense in your reach.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles, we must say, understood his business. Although he commanded only a pleasure yacht, he was ranked among the ablest of the Glasgow captains. He was thirty years of age, with rather rough features, indicating courage and kindness. When a child, the Glenarvan family had taken him under their care, and made him an excellent seaman. He had often given proofs of skill, energy, and coolness during his long voyages, and when Lord Glenarvan offered him the command of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, he accepted it with pride and pleasure, for he loved the lord of Malcolm Castle as a brother, and until then had vainly sought an opportunity to devote himself to his service.</p>
			<p>The mate, Tom Austin, was an old sailor worthy of all confidence; and the crew of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was composed of twenty-five men, including the captain and mate. They all belonged to the county of Dumbarton, were all tried seamen, sons of the tenants of the family, and formed on shipboard a genuine clan of honest people, who of course were not without the national bagpipe. Lord Glenarvan had, in them, a band of faithful subjects, happy in their avocation, devoted, courageous, and skillful in the use of arms, as well as in the management of a ship, while they were ready to follow him on the most perilous expeditions. When they learned where they were going, they could not restrain their joyous emotion, and the echoes of the rocks of Dumbarton awoke to their cries of enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles, while occupied in lading and provisioning his craft, did not forget to prepare Lord and Lady Glenarvan’s apartments for a long voyage. He likewise provided cabins for Captain Grant’s children, for Lady Helena could not refuse Mary permission to accompany her on the expedition.</p>
			<p>As for young Robert, he would have hidden in the hold sooner than not go; even if he had been compelled to serve as cabin-boy, like Lord Nelson and Sir John Franklin, he would have embarked on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>. To think of opposing such a little gentleman! It was not attempted. They were even obliged to take him other than as passenger, for as cabin-boy or sailor he <em>would serve</em>. The captain was accordingly commissioned to teach him the duties of a seaman.</p>
			<p>“Good!” said Robert; “and let him not spare a few blows of the rope’s end if I do not walk straight.”</p>
			<p>“Be easy, my boy,” replied Glenarvan, without adding that the use of the “cat-o’-nine-tails” was prohibited, and moreover quite needless, on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>.</p>
			<p>To complete the roll of the passengers, it will be sufficient to describe Major MacNabb. The major was a man of fifty, of calm, regular features, who did as he was bid; of an excellent and superior character, modest, taciturn, peaceable, and mild; always agreeing with anything or anyone, disputing nothing, and neither contradicting himself nor exaggerating. He would mount with measured step the staircase to his bedchamber, even were a cannonball behind him; and probably to his dying day would never find an opportunity to fly into a passion.</p>
			<p>This man possessed, in a high degree, not only the common courage of the battlefield (that physical bravery due only to nervous strength), but, better still, moral courage, that is to say, firmness of soul. If he had a fault, it was that of being absolutely Scotch from head to foot, a pure-blooded Caledonian, an infatuated observer of the ancient customs of his country. Through his relationship to the Glenarvans he lived at Malcolm Castle; and as major and military man it was very natural that he should be found on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>.</p>
			<p>Such, then, were the passengers of this yacht, summoned by unforeseen circumstances to accomplish one of the most surprising voyages of modern times. Since her arrival at the wharf at Glasgow, she had monopolized the public attention. A considerable number came every day to visit her. They were interested in her alone, and spoke only of her, to the great umbrage of the other captains of the port, among others Captain Burton, commanding the Scotia, a magnificent steamer, moored beside the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, and bound for Calcutta. The Scotia, from her size, had a right to consider the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> as a mere fly-boat. Nevertheless, all the attraction centred in Lord Glenarvan’s yacht, and increased from day to day.</p>
			<p>The time of departure approached. Captain Mangles had shown himself skillful and expeditious. A month after her trial trip in the Frith of Clyde, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, laden, provisioned, and equipped, was ready to put to sea. The 25th of August was appointed for the time of departure, which would enable the yacht to reach the southern latitudes by the beginning of spring. Lord Glenarvan, when his plan was matured, did not neglect to make investigations into the hardships and perils of the voyage; yet he did not hesitate on this account, but prepared to leave Malcolm Castle.</p>
			<p>On the 24th of August, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, Major MacNabb, Mary and Robert Grant, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olbinett, the steward of the yacht, and his wife, who was in the service of Lady Glenarvan, left the castle, after taking an affectionate farewell of their family servants. Several hours afterward they found themselves on board. Many of the population of Glasgow welcomed with sympathetic admiration the young and courageous lady who renounced the pleasures of a life of luxury, and sailed to the rescue of the shipwrecked sailors.</p>
			<p>The apartments of Lord Glenarvan and his wife occupied the entire stern of the vessel. They consisted of two bedchambers, a parlor, and two dressing-rooms, adjoining which was an open square enclosed by six cabins, five of which were occupied by Mary and Robert Grant, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Olbinett, and Major MacNabb. As for the cabins of the captain and the mate, they were situated in the forecastle, and opened on the deck. The crew were lodged between-decks very comfortably, for the yacht of course carried nothing but her coal, provisions, and armament.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was to start on the night of the 24th, as the tide fell at three o’clock in the morning. But first those who were present were witness to a touching scene. At eight in the evening Lord Glenarvan and his companions, the entire crew, from the firemen to the captain, all who were to take part in this voyage of sacrifice, left the yacht, and betook themselves to Saint Mungo, the ancient cathedral of Glasgow. This antique church, an uninjured relic in the midst of the ruins caused by the Reformation, and so marvelously described by Walter Scott, received beneath its massive arches the owners and sailors of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>.</p>
			<p>A numerous throng accompanied them. There in the spacious aisle, filled with tombs of the great and good, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morton implored the blessing of Heaven, and commended the expedition to the care of Providence. For a moment the voice of Mary Grant arose in the old church. The young girl was praying for her benefactors, and shedding before God the sweet tears of gratitude. The assembly retired under the influence of a deep emotion.</p>
			<p>At eleven, everyone was on board. The captain and the crew occupied themselves with the final preparations. At midnight the fires were kindled, and soon clouds of black smoke mingled with the vapors of the night; the sails of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> had been carefully reefed in a canvas sheathing, which served to protect them from injury. The wind blew from the southeast, and did not favor the progress of the vessel; but at two o’clock the ship began to heave under the action of her boilers. The manometer indicated a pressure of four atmospheres, and the overheated steam whistled through the escape-valves. The sea was tranquil, and soon daylight enabled them to distinguish the passes of the Clyde between the buoys and beacons, whose lights were gradually extinguished as the morning dawned.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles informed Lord Glenarvan, who at once came on deck. Very soon the ebb-tide was felt. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> gave a few shrill whistles, slackened her cables, and separated from the surrounding vessels. Her screw was set in motion, which propelled her into the channel of the river. The captain had taken no pilot. He was perfectly acquainted with the navigation of the Clyde, and no one could have commanded better. At a sign from him the yacht started. With his right hand he controlled the engine, and with his left the tiller, with silent but unerring skill.</p>
			<p>Soon the last workshops on the shore gave place to villas, built here and there upon the hills, and the sounds of the city died away in the distance. An hour afterwards, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> passed the rocks of Dumbarton; two hours later she was in the Frith of Clyde; and at six o’clock in the morning she doubled Cantyre Point, emerged from the North Channel, and gained the open sea.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
