<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>
				<a id="CHAPTER_XXII" name="CHAPTER_XXII">CHAPTER XXII.</a>
			</h4>
			<h3>THE FLOOD.</h3>
			<div>OMENS AND MIRAGES.</div>
			<p>Fort Independence is one hundred and fifty miles from the shores of the Atlantic. But for unforeseen and unexpected delays, Glenarvan could have rejoined the Duncan in four days. He could not, however, reconcile himself to the idea of returning on board without Captain Grant, and failing so completely in his search; and did not therefore, as usual, give the orders for departure. But the major assumed the task of saddling the horses, renewing the provisions, and making his arrangements for the journey. Thanks to his activity, the little party, at eight o’clock in the morning, was on its way down the grassy slopes of the Tandil Sierra.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped on in silence. His lordship’s bold and resolute character did not permit him to accept this disappointment calmly. His heart beat violently, and his brain was on fire. Paganel, tormented by the mystery of the document, arranged the words in every way, as if to draw from them a new meaning. Thalcave silently resigned himself to Thaouka’s sagacity. The major, always confident, performed his duties like a man upon whom discouragement can have no effect. Tom Austin and his two sailors shared their master’s annoyance. Once, when a timid hare crossed the path in front of them, the superstitious Scotchmen gazed at one another.</p>
			<p>“A bad omen,” said Wilson.</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the Highlands,” replied Mulready.</p>
			<p>“What is bad in the Highlands is no better here,” added Wilson, sententiously.</p>
			<p>About noon the travelers had descended the mountains and gained the undulating plains that extend to the sea; the boundless prairie spread its broad carpet of verdure before them.</p>
			<p>More than once during the journey the attention and interest of all, but especially of Paganel, were arrested by the curious illusion of the mirage, by which was presented in the sky, at the limits of the horizon, a semblance of the estancias, the poplars and willows near them, and other objects; the images being so much like the reality that it required a strong effort to realize their deceptive character.</p>
			<p>The weather hitherto had been fine, but now the sky assumed a less pleasing aspect. Masses of vapor, generated by the high temperature of the preceding days, condensed into thick clouds and threatened to dissolve in showers of rain. Moreover, the proximity of the Atlantic, and the west wind, which here reigns supreme, rendered the climate of this region peculiarly moist. However, for that day at least the heavy clouds did not break; and at evening the horses, after traveling forty miles, halted on the edge of a deep “cañada,” an immense natural ditch filled with water. A shelter was wanting, but the ponchos served for tents as well as clothing, and peaceful slumbers enwrapped all.</p>
			<p>The next day, as they progressed farther, the presence of subterranean streams betrayed itself more noticeably, and moisture was seen in every depression of the ground. Soon they came to large ponds, some already deep and others just forming. So long as there were only lagoons, the horses could easily extricate themselves; but with these treacherous swamps it was more difficult. Tall grass obstructed them, and it was necessary to incur the danger before it could be understood. These quagmires had been already fatal to more than one human being.</p>
			<p>Robert, who had ridden half a mile in advance, returned at a gallop, crying,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Monsieur Paganel! Monsieur Paganel! A forest of horns!”</p>
			<p>“What!” replied the geographer, “have you found a forest of horns?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; or at least a field.”</p>
			<p>“A field! you are dreaming, my boy,” said Paganel, shrugging his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“I am not dreaming,” retorted Robert; “you shall see for yourself. This is a strange country! People sow horns, and they spring up like corn! I should like very well to have some of the seed.”</p>
			<p>“But he speaks seriously,” said the major.</p>
			<p>“Yes, major, you shall see.”</p>
			<p>Robert was not mistaken, and soon they found themselves before a vast field of horns, regularly planted.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Robert.</p>
			<p>“This is something singular,” replied Paganel, turning towards the Indian with a questioning look.</p>
			<div>AN ANXIOUS INDIAN.</div>
			<p>“The horns come from the ground,” explained Thalcave; “and the cattle are under it.”</p>
			<p>“What!” cried Paganel, “is there a whole drove in this mire?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” answered the Patagonian.</p>
			<p>In fact, a vast herd had perished in this bog, which had given way beneath them. Hundreds of cattle had thus met their death, side by side, by suffocation in this vast quagmire. This circumstance, which sometimes takes place on the plains, could not be ignored by the Indian, and it was a warning which it was proper to heed. They passed around this immense hecatomb, which would have satisfied the most exacting gods of antiquity; and an hour after the field of horns was far behind.</p>
			<p>Thalcave now began to observe with an anxious air the state of things around him. He frequently stopped, and rose in his stirrups. His tall form enabled him to survey a wide range; but, perceiving nothing that could enlighten him, he resumed his undeviating course. A mile farther, he stopped again, and, turning from the beaten track, proceeded a short distance, first to the north, then to the south, and then resumed his place at the head of the party, without saying either what he hoped or what he feared.</p>
			<p>These manœuvres, many times repeated, puzzled Paganel and annoyed Glenarvan. The geographer was accordingly requested to interrogate the Indian, which he did at once. Thalcave replied that he was astonished to see the plain so soaked with moisture. Never within his recollection, since he had performed the office of guide, had his feet trodden a soil so saturated. Even in the season of the great rains the Argentine plain was always easily passed.</p>
			<p>“But to what do you attribute this increasing moisture?” asked Paganel.</p>
			<p>“I know not,” replied the Indian; “and what if I did?”</p>
			<p>“Do the mountain streams, when swollen with the rains, ever overflow their banks?”</p>
			<p>“Sometimes.”</p>
			<p>“And now, perhaps?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” said Thalcave.</p>
			<p>Paganel was forced to be contented with this answer, and communicated to Glenarvan the result of the conversation.</p>
			<p>“And what does Thalcave advise?” inquired Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“What is to be done?” asked Paganel of the Patagonian.</p>
			<p>“Advance quickly,” replied the Indian.</p>
			<p>This advice was easier to give than to follow. The horses were quickly fatigued with treading a soil that sank beneath them deeper and deeper as they progressed, so that this part of the plain might have been compared to an immense basin in which the invading waters would rapidly accumulate. It was advisable, therefore, to cross without delay these sloping terraces that an inundation would have instantly transformed into a lake.</p>
			<p>They hastened their pace, though there was no great depth to the water which spread out in a sheet beneath the horses’ feet. About two o’clock the flood-gates of the heavens opened, and tropical torrents of rain descended. Never was a finer opportunity presented for showing oneself a philosopher. There was no chance of escaping this deluge, and it was better for the travelers to receive it stoically. Their ponchos were soon dripping, and their hats wet them still more, like roofs whose gutters have overflowed. The fringes of the saddle-cloths seemed so many liquid streams; and the horsemen, bespattered by their animals, whose hoofs splashed in the water at every step, rode in a double shower, which came from the ground as well as the sky.</p>
			<div>HYDROPATHIC TREATMENT.</div>
			<p>It was in this wretchedly cold and exhausted state that they arrived, towards evening, at a very miserable rancho. Only people who were not fastidious could have given it the name of a shelter, only travelers in distress would consent to occupy it. But Glenarvan and his companions had no choice. They therefore cowered down in the abandoned hut which would not have satisfied even a poor Indian of the plains. A sorry fire of grass, which gave out more smoke than heat, was kindled with difficulty. The torrents of rain made havoc without, and large drops oozed through the mouldy thatch. The fire was extinguished twenty times, and twenty times did Wilson and Mulready struggle against the invading water.</p>
			<p>The supper was very meagre and comfortless, and every one’s appetite failed. The major alone did justice to the water-soaked repast, and did not lose a mouthful: he was superior to misfortune. As for Paganel, like a Frenchman, he tried to joke; but now he failed.</p>
			<p>“My jokes are wet,” said he: “they miss fire.”</p>
			<p>However, as it was more agreeable⁠—if possible, under the circumstances⁠—to sleep, each one sought in slumber a temporary forgetfulness of his fatigues.</p>
			<p>The night was stormy. The sides of the rancho cracked as if they would break, while the frail structure bent beneath the gusts of wind and threatened to give way at every shock. The unfortunate horses neighed in terror without, exposed to the inclemency of the tempest; and their masters did not suffer less in their miserable shelter. However, sleep drowned all their troubles at last. Robert first closed his eyes, reclining his head on Lord Glenarvan’s shoulder; and soon all the inmates of the rancho slept under the protection of God.</p>
			<p>They woke the next morning at the call of Thaouka, who, always ready, neighed without, and struck the wall of the hut vigorously with his hoof, as though to give the signal for departure. They owed him too much not to obey him, and they accordingly resumed their journey.</p>
			<p>The rain had ceased, but the hard earth held what had fallen. On the impenetrable clay, pools, marshes, and ponds overflowed and formed immense “bañados” of treacherous depth. Paganel, on consulting his map, judged rightly that the Grande and Nivarota Rivers, into which the waters of the plain usually flow, must have mingled together in one broad stream.</p>
			<p>An extremely rapid advance, therefore, became necessary. The common safety was at stake. If the inundation increased, where could they find a refuge? The vast circle of the horizon did not offer a single point, and on this level plain the progress of the water must be rapid. The horses were urged to their utmost speed. Thaouka took the lead, and might have borne the name of sea-horse, for he pranced as if he had been in his native element.</p>
			<p>Suddenly, about six o’clock in the evening, he manifested signs of extreme agitation. He turned frequently towards the vast expanse to the south; his neighs were prolonged, his nostrils keenly snuffed the air, and he reared violently. Thalcave, whom his antics could not unseat, managed his steed without difficulty. The froth from the horse’s mouth was mingled with blood under the action of the firmly-closed bit, and yet the spirited animal could not be calm. If free, his master felt but too well that he would have fled away at full speed towards the north.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter with Thaouka?” asked Paganel. “Has he been bitten by those voracious blood-suckers of the Argentine waters?”</p>
			<p>“No,” replied the Indian.</p>
			<p>“Is he terrified, then, at some danger?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, he has scented danger.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know.”</p>
			<p>Although the eye did not yet reveal the peril that Thaouka divined, the ear could already detect it. A low murmur, like the sound of a rising tide, was heard as from the limit of the horizon. The wind blew in damp gusts laden with spray; the birds, as if fleeing from some unknown phenomenon, shot swiftly through the air; and the horses, wading to their knees, felt the first impulse of the current. Soon a mingled roar, like bellowing, neighing, and bleating, resounded half a mile to the south, and immense herds appeared, tumbling, rising, and rushing, a confused mass of terrified beasts, and fled by with frightful rapidity. It was scarcely possible to distinguish them in the midst of the clouds of spray dashed up by their flight.</p>
			<p>“Quick! quick!” cried Thalcave, in a piercing voice.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” said Paganel.</p>
			<p>“The flood! the flood!” replied Thalcave, spurring his horse towards the north.</p>
			<p>“The inundation!” cried Paganel; and his companions, with him at their head, fled away in the track of Thaouka.</p>
			<p>It was time. Five miles to the south a high and broad wall of water was rushing over the plain, which was fast becoming an ocean. The tall grass disappeared as before the scythe, and the tufts of mimosas, torn up by the current, separated and formed floating islands. The mass of waters spread itself in broad waves of irresistible power. The dikes of the great rivers had evidently given way, and perhaps the waters of the Colorado and Rio Negro were now mingling in a common stream.</p>
			<p>The wall of water descried by Thalcave advanced with the speed of a race-horse. The travelers fled before it like a cloud driven by the storm. Their eyes sought in vain a place of refuge. Sky and water mingled together on the horizon. The horses, excited by the danger, dashed along in a mad gallop, so that their riders could scarcely keep their seats. Glenarvan frequently glanced behind him.</p>
			<p>“The water is overtaking us,” he thought.</p>
			<p>“Quick! quick!” cried Thalcave.</p>
			<div>THE ARK.</div>
			<p>The unfortunate beasts were urged to a swifter pace. From their flanks, lacerated with the spur, flowed bright red streams, which marked their course on the water by long, crimson lines. They stumbled in the hollows of the ground; they were entangled in the hidden grass; they fell and rose again continually. The depth of the water sensibly increased. Long surges announced the on-rush of the mass of water that tossed its foaming crests less than two miles distant.</p>
			<p>For a quarter of an hour this final struggle against the most terrible of elements was prolonged. The fugitives could keep no account of the distance they had traversed; but, judging by the rapidity of their flight, it must have been considerable.</p>
			<p>Meantime the horses, immersed to their breasts, could no longer advance without extreme difficulty. Glenarvan, Paganel, Austin, all believed themselves lost, victims of the horrible death of unfortunates abandoned at sea. Their animals began to lose their footing; six feet of water was sufficient to drown them.</p>
			<p>We must forbear to picture the acute anguish of these eight men overtaken by a rising inundation. They felt their powerlessness to struggle against these convulsions of nature, superior to human strength. Their safety was no longer in their own hands.</p>
			<p>Five minutes after, the horses were swimming, while the current alone carried them along with irresistible force and furious swiftness. All safety seemed impossible, when the voice of the major was heard.</p>
			<p>“A tree!” said he.</p>
			<p>“A tree!” cried Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yonder!” replied Thalcave, and he pointed northward to a kind of gigantic walnut-tree, which rose solitary from the midst of the waters.</p>
			<p>His companions had no need to be urged. This tree that was opportunely presented to them they must reach at all hazards. The horses probably could not accomplish the distance; but the men, at least, could be saved,⁠—the current would carry them.</p>
			<p>At that moment Tom Austin’s horse gave a stifled neigh and disappeared. His rider, extricating himself from the stirrups, began to swim vigorously.</p>
			<p>“Cling to my saddle!” cried Glenarvan to him.</p>
			<p>“Thanks, my lord,” replied he, “my arms are strong.”</p>
			<p>“Your horse, Robert?” continued Glenarvan, turning towards the boy.</p>
			<p>“All right, my lord, all right! He swims like a fish.”</p>
			<p>“Attention!” cried the major, in a loud voice.</p>
			<p>This word was scarcely pronounced, when the enormous wall of water reached them. A huge wave, forty feet high, overwhelmed the fugitives with a terrible roar. Men and beasts, everything, disappeared in a whirlpool of foam. A ponderous liquid mass engulfed them in its furious tide. When the deluge had passed, the men regained the surface, and rapidly counted their numbers; but the horses, except Thaouka, had disappeared forever.</p>
			<p>“Courage! courage!” cried Glenarvan, who supported Paganel with one arm and swam with the other.</p>
			<p>“All right! all right!” replied the worthy geographer; “indeed I am not sorry⁠—”</p>
			<p>What was he not sorry for? No one ever knew; for the poor man was forced to swallow the end of his sentence in half a pint of muddy water.</p>
			<p>The major calmly advanced, taking a regular stroke of which the most skillful swimmer would not have been ashamed. The sailors worked their way along like porpoises in their native element. As for Robert, he clung to Thaouka’s mane, and was thus drawn along. The horse proudly cut the waters, and kept himself instinctively on a line with the tree, towards which the current bore him, and which was now not far distant.</p>
			<p>In a few moments the entire party reached it. It was fortunate; for, if this refuge had failed, all chance of safety would have vanished, and they must have perished in the waves. The water was up to the top of the trunk where the main branches grew, so that it was easy to grasp them.</p>
			<p>Thalcave, leaving his horse, and lifting Robert, seized the first limb, and soon his powerful arms had lodged the exhausted swimmers in a place of safety. But Thaouka, carried away by the current, was rapidly disappearing. He turned his intelligent head towards his master, and, shaking his long mane, neighed for him beseechingly.</p>
			<p>“Do you abandon him?” said Paganel.</p>
			<p>“I?” cried the Indian, and, plunging into the tempestuous waters, he reappeared some distance from the tree. A few moments after, his arm rested upon the neck of Thaouka, and horse and horseman swam away together towards the misty horizon of the north.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
