<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV: The Wreck of the Macquarie</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-45" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Wreck of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The next day the travelers were installed on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i>. Will Halley had not offered the ladies his cabin, which was not to be regretted, as the lair was only fit for the brute.</p>
			<p>The next day the travelers were installed on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i>. Will Halley had not offered the ladies his cabin, which was not to be regretted, as the lair was only fit for the brute.</p>
			<p>At noon they made ready to take the flood-tide. The anchor was weighed. A moderate breeze blew from the southwest. The sails were gradually set, but the five men worked slowly. At last, incited by the oaths of the skipper, they accomplished their task. But in spite of her spread of canvas the brig scarcely advanced. Yet, however poorly she sailed, in five or six days they hoped to reach the harbor of Auckland. At seven o’clock in the evening they lost sight of the shores of Australia, and the lighthouse at Eden. The sea was rough, and the vessel labored heavily in the trough of the waves. The passengers found their situation very uncomfortable; but, as they could not remain on deck, they were forced to submit to confinement.</p>
			<p>That evening conversation very naturally turned upon the land to which they were now sailing, its discovery and colonization; and just as naturally all turned to Paganel as to a bookcase, for some information thereon. It was very readily accessible, although evidently to the geographer’s mind there was something of a painful character connected with the name, the impression, and the very thoughts of New Zealand and its Maori inhabitants.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena, “have your friends, the English, been the only ones to search out this island?”</p>
			<p>“By no means, madam,” was the prompt reply. “On the contrary, they have come second, nay, third, in the race; only,” and he looked half roguishly and half maliciously, “<i>they stayed when they came</i>.”</p>
			<p>And then he told them of its first discovery by Abel Tasman, the Dutch navigator, in 1642; that, when first he landed, there seemed to be amicable feelings expressed by the islanders toward himself, a number of them coming back to his ship, and being apparently well pleased to cultivate intercourse. But on the next day, as he sent his boat to find good anchorage nearer to the shore, seven canoes of the islanders attacked it most violently and suddenly, causing it to capsize, and so vigorously assailing its occupants with their pikes that it was with difficulty any of them were able to swim back to their ship, leaving those of their companions who were not drowned to be butchered by the natives.</p>
			<p>Paganel also told, at great length, the tales of many of the sad incidents which from time to time have marked even the commercial intercourse between the European and the Maori; as, for instance, the sad tale of conflict and bloodshed connected with the death of Captain Marion, a French navigator, in 1772. He had landed near the spot where Surville had ill-treated some of the natives and traitorously seized a son of the chief, Takouri, who yet appeared to welcome this next French visitant, though remembering none the less the terrible duty of vengeance which is felt by the Maori to be so binding.</p>
			<p>For a long time the cloak of friendship was worn by the natives, the more thoroughly to lull the suspicions of the whites, and to entice a larger number on shore; in which endeavor they succeeded only too well. The French ships being greatly out of repair, Marion was induced to fell timber at some distance in the interior, and to establish in this occupation a great number of his men, going frequently to them, and remaining with them and the apparently friendly chiefs.</p>
			<p>On one of these occasions the Maoris fulfilled their revengeful project with a terrible satisfaction to themselves. Only one man, of all those in the interior, managed to escape, the commander himself falling a prey to their vengeance. They then endeavored to kill the second in command, who, with several others, was nearer to the shore. These, of course, at once started for their boats; breathless, they reached them, hotly pursued to the water’s edge by the insatiate savages. Then, safe themselves, the French marksmen picked off the chief, and the previous exultation of the aborigines was, even in the hour of their triumph, turned to lamentation, coupled with wonder at the terrible power of the white man’s fire-barrel.</p>
			<p>All this and much more did the geographer narrate; but it must be confessed that he neither spoke, nor did they listen, with the complacency evinced in his previous tales. Besides, their surroundings were at the time uncomfortable, and the first prognostications of a speedy passage were not likely to be verified.</p>
			<p>Unfortunately, this painful voyage was prolonged. Six days after her departure, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i> had not descried the shores of Auckland. The wind was fair, however, and still blew from the southwest; but nevertheless the brig did not make much headway. The sea was rough, the rigging creaked, the ribs cracked, and the vessel rode the waves with difficulty.</p>
			<p>Fortunately, Will Halley, like a man who was in no hurry, did not crowd on sail, or his masts would inevitably have snapped. Captain Mangles hoped, therefore, that this clumsy craft would reach its destination in safety; still, he was pained to see his companions on board in such miserable quarters.</p>
			<p>But neither Lady Helena nor Mary Grant complained, although the continual rain kept them confined, and the want of air and rolling of the ship seriously incommoded them. Their friends sought to divert them, and Paganel strove to while the time with his stories, but did not succeed so well as previously.</p>
			<p>Of all the passengers, the one most to be pitied was Lord Glenarvan. They rarely saw him below; he could not keep still. His nervous and excitable nature would not submit to an imprisonment between four wooden walls. Day and night, heedless of the torrents of rain and the dashing spray of the sea, he remained on deck, sometimes bending over the rail, sometimes pacing up and down with feverish agitation. His eyes gazed continually into space, and, during the brief lulls, his glass persistently surveyed the horizon. He seemed to question the mute waves; the mist that veiled the sky, the masses of vapor, he would have penetrated with a glance; he could not be resigned, and his countenance betokened an acute grief. The power and hopefulness of this man, hitherto so energetic and courageous, had suddenly failed.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles seldom left him, but at his side endured the severity of the storm. That day, Glenarvan, wherever there was an opening in the mist, scanned the horizon with the utmost persistency. The young captain approached him.</p>
			<p>“Is your lordship looking for land?” he asked.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan shook his head.</p>
			<p>“It will yet be some time before we leave the brig. We ought to have sighted Auckland light thirty-six hours ago.”</p>
			<p>Glenarvan did not answer. He still gazed, and for a moment his glass was pointed towards the horizon to windward of the vessel.</p>
			<p>“The land is not on that side,” said Captain Mangles. “Your lordship should look towards the starboard.”</p>
			<p>“Why, John?” replied Glenarvan. “It is not the land that I am seeking.”</p>
			<p>“What is it, my lord?”</p>
			<p>“My yacht, my <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>! She must be here, in these regions, plowing these seas, in that dreadful employment of a pirate. She is here, I tell you, John, on this course between Australia and New Zealand! I have a presentiment that we shall meet her!”</p>
			<p>“God preserve us from such a meeting, my lord!”</p>
			<p>“Why, John?”</p>
			<p>“Your lordship forgets our situation. What could we do on this brig, if the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> should give us chase? We could not escape.”</p>
			<p>“Escape, John?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lord. We should try in vain. We should be captured, at the mercy of the wretches. Ben Joyce has shown that he does not hesitate at a crime. I should sell my life dearly. We would defend ourselves to the last extremity. Well! But, then, think of Lady Helena and Mary Grant!”</p>
			<p>“Poor women!” murmured Glenarvan. “John, my heart is broken, and sometimes I feel as if despair had invaded it. It seems to me as if new calamities awaited us, as if Heaven had decreed against us! I am afraid!”</p>
			<p>“You, my lord?”</p>
			<p>“Not for myself, John, but for those whom I love, and whom you love also.”</p>
			<p>“Take courage, my lord,” replied the young captain. “We need no longer fear. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i> is a poor sailer, but still she sails. Will Halley is a brutish creature; but I am here, and if the approach to the land seems to me dangerous I shall take the ship to sea again. Therefore from this quarter there is little or no danger. But as for meeting the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, God preserve us, and enable us to escape!”</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles was right. To encounter the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> would be fatal to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i>, and this misfortune was to be feared in these retired seas, where pirates could roam without danger. However, that day, at least, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> did not appear, and the sixth night since their departure from Twofold Bay arrived without Captain Mangles’s fears being realized.</p>
			<p>But that night was destined to be one of terror. Darkness set in almost instantaneously towards evening; the sky was very threatening. Even Will Halley, whose sense of danger was superior to the brutishness of intoxication, was startled by these warning signs. He left his cabin, rubbing his eyes and shaking his great red head. Then he drew a long breath, and examined the masts. The wind was fresh, and was blowing strong towards the New Zealand coast.</p>
			<p>Captain Halley summoned his men, with many oaths, and ordered them to reef the topsails. Captain Mangles approved in silence. He had given up remonstrating with this coarse seaman; but neither he nor Glenarvan left the deck.</p>
			<p>Two hours passed. The sea grew more tempestuous, and the vessel received such severe shocks that it seemed as if her keel were grating on the sand. There was no unusual roughness, but yet this clumsy craft labored heavily, and the deck was deluged by the huge waves. The boat that hung in the larboard davits was swept overboard by a rising billow.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles could not help being anxious. Any other vessel would have mocked these surges; but with this heavy hulk they might well fear foundering, for the deck was flooded with every plunge, and the masses of water, not finding sufficient outlet by the scuppers, might submerge the ship. It would have been wise, as a preparation for any emergency, to cut away the waistcloth to facilitate the egress of the water; but Will Halley refused to take this precaution.</p>
			<p>However, a greater danger threatened the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i>, and probably there was no longer time to prevent it. About half-past eleven Captain Mangles and Wilson, who were standing on the leeward side, were startled by an unusual sound. Their nautical instincts were roused, and the captain seized the sailor’s hand.</p>
			<p>“The surf!” said he.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied Wilson. “The sea is breaking on the reefs.”</p>
			<p>“Not more than two cable-lengths distant.”</p>
			<p>“Not more! The shore is here!”</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles leaned over the railing, gazed at the dark waves, and cried:</p>
			<p>“The sounding-lead, Wilson!”</p>
			<p>The skipper, who was in the forecastle, did not seem to suspect his situation. Wilson grasped the sounding-line, which lay coiled in its pail, and rushed into the port-shrouds. He cast the lead; the rope slipped between his fingers; at the third knot it stopped.</p>
			<p>“Three fathoms!” cried Wilson.</p>
			<p>“We are on the breakers!” shouted the sober captain to the stupefied one.</p>
			<p>Whether the former saw Halley shrug his shoulders or not is of little consequence. At all events, he rushed towards the wheel and crowded the helm hard alee, while Wilson, letting go the line, hauled upon the topsail yardarms to luff the ship. The sailor who was steering, and had been forcibly pushed aside, did not at all understand this sudden attack.</p>
			<p>“To the port-yards! let loose the sails!” cried the young captain, managing so as to escape the reefs.</p>
			<p>For half a minute, the starboard side of the brig grazed the rocks, and, in spite of the darkness, John perceived a roaring line of breakers that foamed a few yards from the ship.</p>
			<p>At this moment Will Halley, becoming conscious of the imminent danger, lost his presence of mind. His sailors, who were scarcely sober, could not comprehend his orders. Moreover, his incoherent words and contradictory commands showed that this stupid drunkard’s coolness had failed. He was surprised by the nearness of the land, which was only eight miles off, when he thought it thirty or forty. The currents had taken him unawares, and thrown him out of his ordinary course.</p>
			<p>However, Captain Mangles’s prompt management had rescued the brig from her peril; but he did not know his position. Perhaps he was enclosed by a chain of reefs. The wind blew fresh from the east, and at every pitch they might strike bottom.</p>
			<p>The roar of the surf was soon redoubled, and it was necessary to luff still more. John crowded the helm down and braced farther to leeward. The breakers multiplied beneath the prow of the ship, and they were obliged to tack so as to put to sea. Would this maneuver succeed with such an unsteady vessel, and under such reduced sail? It was uncertain, but as their only chance they must venture it.</p>
			<p>“Hard alee!” cried Captain Mangles to Wilson.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Macquarie</i> began to approach the new line of reefs. Soon the water foamed above the submerged rocks. It was a moment of torturing suspense. The spray glittered on the crests of the waves. You would have thought a phosphorescent glow had suddenly illumined the water. Wilson and Mulready forced down the wheel with their whole weight.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a shock was felt. The vessel had struck upon a rock. The bob-stays broke, and nearly overthrew the mainmast. Could they come about without any other injury? No; for all at once there was a calm, and the ship veered to windward again, and her movements suddenly ceased. A lofty wave seized and bore her forward towards the reefs, while she rolled heavily. The mainmast went by the board with all its rigging, the brig heaved twice and was motionless, leaning over to starboard. The pump-lights were shattered in pieces, and the passengers rushed to the deck; but the waves were sweeping it from one end to the other, and they could not remain without danger. Captain Mangles, knowing that the ship was firmly imbedded in the sand, besought them for their own sakes to go below again.</p>
			<p>“The truth, John?” asked Glenarvan, faintly.</p>
			<p>“The truth, my lord, is that we shall not founder. As for being destroyed by the sea, that is another question; but we have time to take counsel.”</p>
			<p>“Is it midnight?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lord, and we must wait for daylight.”</p>
			<p>“Can we not put to sea in the boat?”</p>
			<p>“In this storm and darkness it is impossible. And, moreover, where should we strike land?”</p>
			<p>“Well, John, let us remain here till morning.”</p>
			<p>Meantime Will Halley was running about the deck like a madman. His sailors, who had recovered from their stupor, stove in a brandy-barrel and began to drink. Mangles foresaw that their drunkenness would lead to terrible scenes. The captain could not be relied upon to restrain them; the miserable man tore his hair and wrung his hands; he thought only of his cargo, which was not insured.</p>
			<p>“I am ruined! I am lost!” cried he, running to and fro.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles scarcely thought of consoling him. He armed his companions, and all stood ready to repel the sailors, who were filling themselves with brandy, and cursing frightfully.</p>
			<p>“The first of these wretches who approaches,” said the major calmly, “I will shoot like a dog.”</p>
			<p>The sailors doubtless saw that the passengers were determined to keep them at bay, for, after a few attempts at plunder, they disappeared. Captain Mangles paid no more attention to these drunken men, but waited impatiently for day.</p>
			<p>The ship was now absolutely immovable. The sea grew gradually calm, and the wind subsided. The hull could, therefore, hold out a few hours longer. At sunrise they would examine the shore. If it seemed easy to land, the yawl, now the only boat on board, would serve to transport the crew and passengers. It would require three trips, at least, to accomplish this, for there was room for only four persons. As for the gig, it had been swept overboard, during the storm, as before mentioned.</p>
			<p>While reflecting on the dangers of his situation, the young captain, leaning against the binnacle, listened to the roar of the surf. He strove to pierce the dense darkness, and estimate how far he was from that desired yet dreaded coast. Breakers are frequently heard several leagues at sea. Could the frail cutter weather so long a voyage in her present shattered state?</p>
			<p>While he was thinking thus, and longing for a little light in the gloomy sky, the ladies, relying upon his words, were reposing in their berths. The steadiness of the brig secured them several hours of rest. Glenarvan and the others, no longer hearing the cries of the drunken crew, refreshed themselves also by a hasty sleep, and, early in the morning, deep silence reigned on board this vessel, which had sunk to rest, as it were, upon her bed of sand.</p>
			<p>About four o’clock the first light appeared in the east. The clouds were delicately tinged by the pale rays of the dawn. Captain Mangles came on deck. Along the horizon extended a curtain of mist. A few vague outlines floated in the vapors of the morning. A gentle swell still agitated the sea, and the outer waves were lost in the dense, motionless fog.</p>
			<p>He waited. The light gradually brightened, and the horizon glowed with crimson hues. The misty curtain gradually enveloped the vast vault of the firmament. Black rocks emerged from the water. Then, a line was defined along a border of foam, and a luminous point kindled like a lighthouse at the summit of a peak against the still invisible disk of the rising sun.</p>
			<p>“Land!” cried Captain Mangles.</p>
			<p>His companions, awakened by his voice, rushed on deck, and gazed in silence at the coast that was seen on the horizon. Whether hospitable or fatal, it was to be their place of refuge.</p>
			<p>“Where is that Halley?” asked Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“I do not know, my lord,” replied Captain Mangles.</p>
			<p>“And his sailors?”</p>
			<p>“Disappeared, like himself.”</p>
			<p>“And like himself, doubtless, drunk,” added MacNabb.</p>
			<p>“Let us search for them,” said Glenarvan; “we cannot abandon them on this vessel.”</p>
			<p>Mulready and Wilson went down to the bunks in the forecastle. The place was empty. They then visited between-decks, and the hold, but found neither Halley nor his sailors.</p>
			<p>“What! nobody?” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Have they fallen into the sea?” asked Paganel.</p>
			<p>“Anything is possible,” replied Captain Mangles, who cared little for their disappearance.</p>
			<p>Then, turning towards the stern, he said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“To the boat!”</p>
			<p>Wilson and Mulready followed, to assist in lowering it.</p>
			<p>The yawl was gone!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
