<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-47" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h2>.
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Dreaded Country.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			
			<p>What Paganel had stated was indisputable. The cruelty of the New Zealanders could not be doubted. There was, therefore, danger in landing. But if the danger had been a hundred times greater, it must have been faced. Captain Mangles felt the necessity of leaving this vessel, which would soon break up. Between two perils, one certain, the other only probable, there was no possible hesitation.</p>
			<header><p>Another Change of Residence.</p></header>
			<p>As for the chance of being picked up by some passing ship, they could not reasonably rely upon it, for the Macquarie was out of the course usually taken in going to New Zealand. The shipwreck had happened on the desert shores of Ika-Na-Maoui.</p>
			<p>“When shall we start?” asked Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Tomorrow morning at ten o’clock,” replied Captain Mangles. “The tide will begin to rise then, and will carry us ashore.”</p>
			<p>Early the next day the raft was finished. The captain had given his entire attention to its construction. They needed a steady and manageable craft, and one capable of resisting the waves for a voyage of nine miles. The masts of the brig could alone furnish the necessary materials.</p>
			<p>The raft was at length completed. It could doubtless sustain the shock of the surges; but could it be steered, and the coast be reached, if the wind should veer? This was a question only to be decided by trial.</p>
			<p>At nine o’clock the loading began. The provisions were first put on board in sufficient quantities to last until the arrival at Auckland, for there could be no reliance upon the products of this dreaded country. Olbinett furnished some preserved meats, the remains of the Macquarie’s supplies. There was very little, however; and they were forced to depend upon the coarse fare of the mess, which consisted of very inferior ship-biscuits and two barrels of salt fish, greatly to the steward’s regret.</p>
			<p>These stores were enclosed in sealed cans and then secured to the foot of the mast. The arms and ammunition were put in a safe and dry place. Fortunately, the travelers were well supplied with rifles and revolvers.</p>
			<p>A small anchor was taken on board, in case they should reach the shore at low tide and be forced to anchor in the offing. Flood-tide soon began, the breeze blew gently from the northwest, and a slight swell agitated the surface of the sea.</p>
			<p>“Are we ready?” asked Captain Mangles.</p>
			<p>“All is ready, captain,” replied Wilson.</p>
			<p>“Aboard, then!”</p>
			<p>Lady Helena and Mary Grant descended the ship’s side by a clumsy rope-ladder, and took their seats at the foot of the mast near the cases of provisions, their companions around them. Wilson took the helm, the captain stationed himself at the sail-tackling, and Mulready cut the cable that confined the raft to the brig. The sail was spread, and they began to move towards the shore under the combined influence of wind and tide.</p>
			<p>The coast was only nine miles distant,⁠—not a difficult voyage for a well-manned boat; but with the raft it was necessary to advance slowly. If the wind held out, they might perhaps reach land with this tide; but if there should be a calm, the ebb would carry them back, or they would be compelled to anchor and wait for the next tide.</p>
			<p>However, Captain Mangles hoped to succeed. The wind freshened. As it had been flood now for some hours, they must either reach land soon, or anchor.</p>
			<p>Fortune favored them. Gradually the black points of the rocks and the yellow sand of the bars disappeared beneath the waves; but great attention and extreme skill became necessary, in this dangerous neighborhood, to guide their unwieldy craft.</p>
			<p>They were still five miles from shore. A clear sky enabled them to distinguish the principal features of the country. To the northeast rose a lofty mountain, whose outline was defined against the horizon in a very singular resemblance to the grinning profile of a monkey.</p>
			<p>Paganel soon observed that all the sandbars had disappeared.</p>
			<p>“Except one,” replied Lady Helena.</p>
			<p>“Where?” asked Paganel.</p>
			<p>“There,” said Lady Helena, pointing to a black speck a mile ahead.</p>
			<p>“That is true,” answered Paganel. “Let us try to determine its position, that we may not run upon it when the tide covers it.”</p>
			<p>“It is exactly at the northern projection of the mountain,” said Captain Mangles. “Wilson, bear away towards the offing.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, captain,” replied the sailor, bearing with all his weight upon the steering oar.</p>
			<p>They approached nearer; but, strange to say, the black point still rose above the water. The captain gazed at it attentively, and, to see better, employed Paganel’s telescope.</p>
			<p>“It is not a rock,” said he, after a moment’s examination; “it is a floating object, that rises and falls with the swell.”</p>
			<p>“Is it not a piece of the Macquarie’s mast?” asked Lady Helena.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Glenarvan; “no fragment could have drifted so far from the ship.”</p>
			<p>“Wait!” cried Captain Mangles. “I recognize it. It is the boat.”</p>
			<p>“The brig’s boat?” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my lord, the brig’s boat, bottom upwards.”</p>
			<p>“The unfortunate sailors!” exclaimed Lady Helena, “they have perished!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, madam,” continued the captain; “and they might have foreseen it; for in the midst of these breakers, on a stormy sea, and in such profound darkness, they fled to certain death.”</p>
			<p>“May Heaven have pity on them!” murmured Mary Grant.</p>
			<p>For a few moments the passengers were silent. They gazed at this frail bark towards which they drew nearer and nearer. It had evidently capsized a considerable distance from land, and of those who embarked in it probably not one had survived.</p>
			<p>“But this boat may be useful,” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” replied Captain Mangles. “Come about, Wilson.”</p>
			<header><p>Realities and Fancies.</p></header>
			<p>The direction of the raft was changed, but the wind subsided gradually, and it cost them much time to reach the boat. Mulready, standing at the bow, warded off the shock, and the yawl was drawn alongside.</p>
			<p>“Empty?” asked Captain Mangles.</p>
			<p>“Yes, captain,” replied the sailor, “the boat is empty, and her seams have started open. She is of no use to us.”</p>
			<p>“Can we not save any part?” asked MacNabb.</p>
			<p>“No,” answered the captain. “She is only fit to burn.”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry,” said Paganel, “for the yawl might have taken us to Auckland.”</p>
			<p>“We must be resigned, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paganel,” rejoined the captain. “Moreover, on such a rough sea, I prefer our raft to that frail conveyance. A slight shock would dash it in pieces! Therefore, my lord, we have nothing more to stay here for.”</p>
			<p>“As you wish, John,” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Forward, Wilson,” continued the young captain, “straight for the coast!”</p>
			<p>The tide would yet flow for about an hour, and in this time they could accomplish a considerable distance. But soon the breeze subsided almost entirely, and the raft was motionless. Soon it even began to drift towards the open sea under the influence of the ebb.</p>
			<p>The captain did not hesitate a moment.</p>
			<p>“Anchor!” cried he.</p>
			<p>Mulready, who was in an instant ready to execute this order, let fall the anchor, and the raft drifted till the cable was taut. The sail was reefed, and arrangements were made for a long detention. Indeed, the tide would not turn till late in the evening; and, as they did not care to sail in the dark, they anchored for the night in sight of land.</p>
			<p>Quite a heavy swell agitated the surface of the water, and seemed to set steadily towards the shore. Glenarvan, therefore, when he learned that the whole night would be passed on board, asked why they did not take advantage of this current to approach the coast.</p>
			<p>“My lord,” replied the young captain, “is deceived by an optical illusion. The apparent onward movement is only an oscillation of the water, nothing more. Throw a piece of wood into the water, and you will see that it will remain stationary, so long as the ebb is not felt. We must therefore have patience.”</p>
			<p>“And dinner,” added the major.</p>
			<p>Olbinett took out of a case of provisions some pieces of dried meat and a dozen biscuits, though reluctant to offer such meagre fare. It was accepted, however, with good grace, even by the ladies, whose appetites the fresh sea air greatly improved.</p>
			<p>Night approached. Already the sun’s disk, glowing with crimson, was disappearing beneath the horizon; and the waters glistened and sparkled like sheets of liquid silver under his last rays. Nothing could be seen but sky and water, except one sharply-defined object, the hull of the Macquarie, motionless on the reefs. The short twilight was rapidly followed by the darkness, and soon the land that bounded the horizon some miles away was lost in the gloom. In this perplexing situation these shipwrecked people lapsed into an uneasy and distressing drowsiness, and as the result at daybreak all were more exhausted than refreshed.</p>
			<p>With the turn of the tide the wind rose. It was six o’clock in the morning, and time was precious. Preparations were made for getting under way, and the order was given to weigh anchor; but the flukes, by the strain of the cable, were so deeply imbedded in the sand that without the windlass even the tackling that Wilson arranged could not draw them out.</p>
			<header><p>Terra Firma Once More.</p></header>
			<p>Half an hour passed in useless efforts. The captain, impatient to set sail, cut the cable, and thus took away all possibility of anchoring, in case the tide should not enable them to reach the shore. The sail was unfurled, and they drifted slowly towards the land that rose in grayish masses against the background of the sky, illumined by the rising sun. The reefs were skillfully avoided, but, with the unsteady breeze, they did not seem to draw nearer the shore.</p>
			<p>At last, however, land was less than a mile distant, craggy with rocks and very precipitous. It was necessary to find a practicable landing. The wind now moderated and soon subsided entirely, the sail flapping idly against the mast. The tide alone moved the raft; but they had to give up steering, and masses of seaweed retarded their progress.</p>
			<p>After awhile they gradually became stationary three cable-lengths from shore. But they had no anchor, and would they not be carried out to sea again by the ebb? With eager glance and anxious heart the captain looked towards the inaccessible shore.</p>
			<p>Just at this moment a shock was felt. The raft stopped. They had stranded on a sandbar, not far from the coast. Glenarvan, Robert, Wilson, and Mulready leaped into the water, and moored their bark firmly with cables on the adjoining reefs. The ladies were carried in their companions’ arms, and reached the shore without wetting a single fold of their garments; and soon all, with arms and provisions, had set foot on the inhospitable shores of New Zealand.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan, without losing an hour, would have followed the coast to Auckland; but since early morning the sky had been heavy with clouds, which, towards noon, descended in torrents of rain. Hence it was impossible to start on their journey, and advisable to seek a shelter.</p>
			<p>Wilson discovered, fortunately, a cavern, hollowed out by the sea in the basaltic rocks of the shore, and here the travelers took refuge with their arms and provisions. There was an abundance of dry seaweed, lately cast up by the waves. This formed a soft couch, of which they availed themselves. Several pieces of wood were piled up at the entrance and then kindled; and while the fire served to dry their garments conversation beguiled the hours, as they lay or stood at ease.</p>
			<header><p>Seals and Sirens.</p></header>
			<p>Paganel, as usual, upon being appealed to, could tell them of the rise, extension, and consolidation of the British power upon the island; he informed them of the beginnings⁠—and, to his belief, of the causes⁠—of the strife which for years decimated the aborigines, and was very injurious to the colonists who had emigrated; then, in reply to Robert’s questions, he went on to speak of those who on a narrower theatre had emulated by their heroism and patience the deeds of the world’s great travelers and scientific explorers. He told them of Witcombe and Charlton Howitt, men known in their own circles and in connection with their own branch of the New Zealand government. At still greater length he detailed the adventures of Jacob Louper, who was the companion of Witcombe, and had gone as his assistant to discover a practicable route over the mountains in the north of the province of Canterbury. In those mountain wilds, which even the islanders rarely traverse, these two Europeans suffered greatly, but still worse was their fate when they descended to the water-level and essayed to cross the Taramakau near its mouth. Jacob Louper at length found two old and almost useless canoes, and by attaching the one to the other they hoped to accomplish the passage safely. Before they had reached the middle of the rapid current, however, both the tubs capsized. Louper, with difficulty, managed to support himself on one of them, and by clinging to it was at length carried to the river’s bank, which his companion also reached; but when after a period of insensibility Louper returned to consciousness and found the body of Witcombe, it was lifeless. Though terribly bruised and still bleeding from his wounds, Louper hollowed a grave for the remains, and then, after many more days of privation and danger, came to the huts of some of the Maoris, by whose assistance he at length reached the settled parts of the colony.</p>
			<p>These facts and reminiscences, it must be confessed, were not of the most inspiriting character; but they were in the same key as most of Paganel’s disquisitions and information concerning these islands, and they were before a late hour exchanged for peaceful though probably dreamy slumbers, by his hearers.</p>
			<p>Early the next morning the signal for departure was given. The rain had ceased during the night, and the sky was covered with grayish clouds, which intercepted the rays of the sun, so that the temperature thus moderated enabled them to endure the fatigues of the journey.</p>
			<p>By consulting the map, Paganel had calculated that they would have to travel eight days. But, instead of following the windings of the coast, he considered it best to proceed to the village of Ngarnavahia, at the junction of the Waikato and Waipa rivers. Here the overland mail-road passed, and it would thence be easy to reach Drury, and rest, after their hardships, in a comfortable hotel.</p>
			<p>But before they left the shore their attention was drawn to the large number of seals, of a peculiar appearance and genus, which lay on the broad sands daily washed by the tidal water. These seals, with their rounded heads, their upturned look, their expressive eyes, presented an appearance, almost a physiognomy, that was mild and well-nigh tender, and served to recall to the traveler’s memory the tales about the sirens of the olden and modern times, who served as the enchantresses to just such inhospitable shores as that seemed on which they had themselves been cast. These animals, which are very numerous on the coast of New Zealand, are hunted and killed for the sake of their oil and their skins, and Paganel was of course able to tell how much within the last few years they had been searched for by the traders and navigators on these seas.</p>
			<p>Whilst speaking of these matters, Robert drew Paganel’s attention to some curious amphibious creatures, resembling the seals, but larger, which were devouring with rapidity the large stones lying on the shore.</p>
			<p>“Look,” said he, “here are seals which feed on pebbles.”</p>
			<p>Paganel assured them that these sea-elephants were only weighting themselves preparatory to their descent into the water, and protested that if they would but wait for a time they might see them descend and subsequently return when they had unloaded themselves. The first part of this programme they saw accomplished; but, greatly to Paganel’s grief, Glenarvan would not longer delay the party, and they soon began to see inland beauties and curiosities of another sort.</p>
			<p>The district through which they had to walk this day and the next was one very thick with brush and underwood, and there was no possibility of horse or vehicle passing or meeting them. They now regretted the absence of their Australian cart, for the height and frequency of the large ferns in the neighborhood prevented their making any rapid progress on foot.</p>
			<header><p>The Last Stage of Peripatetics.</p></header>
			<p>Here and there, however, Robert and Paganel would rejoice together over some choice bush or bird that they had met with. Notable among the latter was the New Zealand “kiwi,” known to naturalists as the apteryx, and which is becoming very scarce, from the pursuit of its many enemies. Robert discovered in a nest on the ground a couple of these birds without tails or wings, but with four toes on the foot, and a long beak or bill like that of a woodcock, and small white feathers all over its body. Of this bird there was then an entire absence in the zoological collections of Europe, and Paganel indulged the hope that he might be able to be the proud contributor of such a valuable specimen to the “Jardin” of his own city. For the present, at least, the realization of his hopes had to be deferred; and at length, after some days of weariness and continued travel, the party reached the banks of the Waipa. The country was deserted. There was no sign of natives, no path that would indicate the presence of man in these regions. The waters of the river flowed between tall bushes, or glided over sandy shallows, while the range of vision extended to the hills that enclosed the valley on the east.</p>
			<p>At four o’clock in the afternoon nine miles had been valiantly accomplished. According to the map, which Paganel continually consulted, the junction of the Waikato and Waipa could not be more than five miles distant. The road to Auckland passed this point, and there they would encamp for the night. As for the fifty miles that would still separate them from the capital, two or three days would be sufficient for this, and even eight hours, if they should meet the mail-coach.</p>
			<p>“Then,” said Glenarvan, “we shall be compelled to encamp again tonight.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied Paganel; “but, as I hope, for the last time.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better; for these are severe hardships for Lady Helena and Mary Grant.”</p>
			<p>“And they endure them heroically,” added Captain Mangles. “But, if I am not mistaken, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paganel, you have spoken of a village situated at the junction of the two rivers.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” answered the geographer; “here it is on the map. It is Ngarnavahia, about two miles below the junction.”</p>
			<p>“Well, could we not lodge there for the night? Lady Helena and Miss Grant would not hesitate to go two miles farther, if they could find a tolerable hotel.”</p>
			<p>“A hotel!” cried Paganel. “A hotel in a Maori village! There is not even a tavern. This village is only a collection of native huts; and, far from seeking shelter there, my advice is to avoid it most carefully.”</p>
			<p>“Always your fears, Paganel!” said Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“My dear lord, distrust is better than confidence among the Maoris. I do not know upon what terms they are with the English. Now, timidity aside, such as ourselves would be fine prizes, and I dislike to try New Zealand hospitality. I therefore think it wise to avoid this village, and likewise any meeting with the natives. Once at Drury, it will be different, and there our courageous ladies can refresh themselves at their ease for the fatigues of their journey.”</p>
			<p>The geographer’s opinion prevailed. Lady Helena preferred to pass the last night in the open air rather than to expose her companions. Neither she nor Mary Grant required a halt, and they therefore continued to follow the banks of the river.</p>
			<p>Two hours after, the first shadows of evening began to descend the mountains. The sun before disappearing below the western horizon had glinted a few rays through a rift in the clouds. The eastern peaks were crimsoned with the last beams of day.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan and his friends hastened their pace. They knew the shortness of the twilight in this latitude, and how quickly night sets in. It was important to reach the junction of the two rivers before it became dark. But a dense fog rose from the earth, and made it very difficult to distinguish the way.</p>
			<p>Fortunately, hearing availed in place of sight. Soon a distinct murmur of the waters indicated the union of the two streams in a common bed, and not long after the little party arrived at the point where the Waipa mingles with the Waikato in resounding cascades.</p>
			<p>“Here is the Waikato,” cried Paganel, “and the road to Auckland runs along its right bank.”</p>
			<p>“We shall see tomorrow,” replied the major. “Let us encamp here. It seems to me as if those deeper shadows yonder proceeded from a little thicket of trees that has grown here expressly to shelter us. Let us eat and sleep.”</p>
			<header><p>A Transformation Scene.</p></header>
			<p>“Eat,” said Paganel, “but of biscuits and dried meat, without kindling a fire. We have arrived here unseen; let us try to go away in the same manner. Fortunately, this fog will render us invisible.”</p>
			<p>The group of trees was reached, and each conformed to the geographer’s rigorous regulations. The cold supper was noiselessly eaten, and soon a profound sleep overcame the weary travelers.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
