<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX: The Storm on the Indian Ocean</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup><h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2> <h3 epub:type="title">The Storm on the Indian Ocean</h3></hgroup>
			<p>Two days after this conversation, Captain Mangles took an observation, and the passengers saw, to their great satisfaction, upon consulting the map, that they were in the vicinity of Cape Bernouilli, which they might expect to reach in four days. The west wind had hitherto favored the progress of the yacht, but for several days it had shown a tendency to fail, and now there was a perfect calm. The sails flapped idly against the masts, and had it not been for her powerful screw, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> would have been becalmed on the ocean.</p>
			<p>This state of things might be prolonged indefinitely. At evening Glenarvan consulted the captain on the subject. The latter, whose supply of coal was rapidly diminishing, appeared much disturbed at the subsidence of the wind. He had covered his ship with canvas, and set his studding- and mainsails, that he might take advantage of the least breeze; but, in nautical language, there was not enough wind “to fill a hat.”</p>
			<p>“At all events,” said Glenarvan, “we need not complain. It is better to be without wind than to have a contrary one.”</p>
			<p>“Your lordship is right,” replied Captain Mangles; “but I dread some sudden change in the weather. We are now in the neighborhood of the trade-winds, which, from October to April, blow from the northeast, and our progress will, therefore, be very much retarded.”</p>
			<p>“But what can we do, captain? If this misfortune occurs, we must submit to it. It will only be a delay, after all.”</p>
			<p>“Probably, if a storm does not come upon us too.”</p>
			<p>“Do you fear bad weather?” asked Glenarvan, looking at the sky, which, however, was cloudless.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied the captain. “I tell your lordship, but would conceal my apprehensions from Lady Helena and Miss Grant.”</p>
			<p>“You act wisely. What do you apprehend?”</p>
			<p>“There are signs of a great storm. Do not trust the appearance of the sky, my lord; nothing is more deceptive. For two days the barometer has fallen to an alarming degree. This is a warning that I cannot disregard. I particularly fear the storms of the South Seas, for I have been already exposed to them.”</p>
			<p>“John,” replied Glenarvan, “the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> is a stout vessel, and her captain a skillful seaman. Let the storm come; we will take care of ourselves.”</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles, while giving expression to his fears, was by no means forgetful of his duty as a sailor. The steady fall of the barometer caused him to take every measure of precaution. The sky, as yet, gave no indication of the approaching tempest; but the warnings of his infallible instrument were not to be disregarded.</p>
			<p>The young captain accordingly remained on deck all night. About eleven o’clock the sky grew threatening towards the south. All hands were immediately called on deck, to take in the sails. At midnight the wind freshened. The creaking of the masts, the rattling of the rigging, and the groaning of bulkheads informed the passengers of the state of affairs. Paganel, Glenarvan, the major, and Robert came on deck to render assistance if it should be needed. Over the sky, that they had left clear and studded with stars, now rolled thick clouds broken by light bands and spotted like the skin of a leopard.</p>
			<p>“Has the storm broken upon us?” asked Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“Not yet, but it will presently,” replied the captain.</p>
			<p>At that moment he gave the order to reef the topsail. The sailors sprang into the windward rattlings, and with difficulty accomplished their task. Captain Mangles wished to keep on as much sail as possible, to support the yacht and moderate her rolling. After these precautions had been taken, he told the mate and the boatswain to prepare for the assault of the tempest, which could not be long in breaking forth. Still, like an officer at the storming of a breach, he did not leave the point of observation, but from the upper deck endeavored to draw from the stormy sky its secrets.</p>
			<p>It was now one o’clock in the morning. Lady Helena and Miss Grant, aroused by the unusual bustle, ventured to come on deck. The wind was sharply whistling through the cordage, which, like the strings of a musical instrument, resounded as if some mighty bow had caused their rapid vibrations; the pulleys clashed against each other; the ropes creaked with a sharp sound in their rough sockets; the sails cracked like cannon, and vast waves rolled up to assail the yacht, as it lightly danced on their foaming crests.</p>
			<p>When the captain perceived the ladies, he approached and besought them to return to the cabin. Several waves had already been shipped, and the deck might be swept at any moment. The din of the elements was now so piercing that Lady Helena could scarcely hear the young captain.</p>
			<p>“Is there any danger?” she managed to ask him during a momentary lull in the storm.</p>
			<p>“No, madam,” replied he; “but neither you nor Miss Mary can remain on deck.”</p>
			<p>The ladies did not oppose an order that seemed more like an entreaty, and returned to the cabin just as a wave, rolling over the stern, shook the compass-lights in their sockets. The violence of the wind redoubled; the masts bent under the pressure of sail, and the yacht seemed to rise on the billows.</p>
			<p>“Brail up the mainsail!” cried the captain; “haul in the topsails and jibs!”</p>
			<p>The sailors sprang to their places; the halyards were loosened, the brails drawn down, the jibs taken in with a noise that rose above the storm, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, whose smokestack belched forth torrents of black smoke, rolled heavily in the sea.</p>
			<p>Glenarvan, the major, Paganel, and Robert gazed with admiration and terror at this struggle with the waves. They clung tightly to the rigging, unable to exchange a word, and watched the flocks of stormy petrels, those melancholy birds of the storm, as they sported in the raging winds.</p>
			<p>At that moment a piercing sound was heard above the roar of the hurricane. The steam was rapidly escaping, not through the escape-valve, but through the pipes of the boiler. The alarm-whistle sounded with unusual shrillness; the yacht gave a terrible lurch, and Wilson, who was at the helm, was overthrown by an unexpected blow of the wheel. The vessel was in the trough of the sea, and no longer manageable.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” cried Captain Mangles, rushing to the stern.</p>
			<p>“The ship is careening!” replied Austin.</p>
			<p>“Is the rudder unhinged?”</p>
			<p>“To the engine! to the engine!” cried the engineer.</p>
			<p>The captain rushed down the ladder. A cloud of steam filled the engine-room; the pistons were motionless in their cylinders, and the cranks gave no movement to the shaft. The engineer, seeing that all efforts were useless, and fearing for his boilers, had let out the steam through the escape-valve.</p>
			<p>“What has happened?” asked the captain.</p>
			<p>“The screw is either bent or entangled,” replied the engineer; “it will not work.”</p>
			<p>“Is it impossible to free it?”</p>
			<p>“Impossible, at present.”</p>
			<p>To attempt to repair the accident at that moment was out of the question. The screw would not move, and the steam, being no longer effective, had escaped through the valves. The captain was, therefore, forced to rely on his sails, and seek the aid of the wind, which had been hitherto his most dangerous enemy.</p>
			<p>He came on deck, and, briefly informing Glenarvan of the situation, begged him to return to the cabin with the others; but the latter wished to remain.</p>
			<p>“No, my lord,” replied Captain Mangles, in a firm tone: “I must be alone here with my crew. Go! The ship may be in danger, and the waves would drench you unmercifully.”</p>
			<p>“But we may be of use⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Go, go, my lord; you must! There are times when I am master on board. Retire, as I wish!”</p>
			<p>For John Mangles to express himself so authoritatively, the situation must have been critical. Glenarvan understood that it was his duty to obey. He therefore left the deck, followed by his three companions, and joined the ladies in the cabin, who were anxiously awaiting the result of this struggle with the elements.</p>
			<p>“My brave John is an energetic man,” remarked Glenarvan as he entered.</p>
			<p>Meantime Captain Mangles lost no time in extricating the ship from her perilous situation. He resolved to keep towards the Cape, that he might deviate as little as possible from his prescribed course. It was, therefore, necessary to brace the sails obliquely to the wind. The topsail was reefed, a kind of foresail rigged on the mainstay, and the helm crowded hard aport. The yacht, which was a stanch and fleet vessel, started like a spirited horse that feels the spur, and proudly breasted the angry billows.</p>
			<p>The rest of the night was passed in this situation. They hoped that the tempest would abate by break of day. Vain hope! At eight o’clock in the morning it was still blowing hard, and the wind soon became a hurricane.</p>
			<p>The captain said nothing, but he trembled for his vessel and those whom she carried. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> now and then gave a fearful lurch; her stanchions cracked, and sometimes the yards of the mainmast struck the crests of the waves. At one moment the crew thought the yacht would not rise again. Already the sailors, hatchet in hand, were rushing to cut away the fore-shrouds, when they were violently torn from their fastenings by the blast. The ship righted herself, but, without support on the waves, she was tossed about so terribly that the masts threatened to break at their very foundations. She could not long endure such rolling; she was growing weak, and soon her shattered sides and opening seams must give way for the water.</p>
			<p>Captain Mangles had but one resource,⁠—to rig a storm-jib. He succeeded after several hours’ labor, but it was not until three o’clock in the afternoon that the jib was hauled to the mainstay and set to the wind. With this piece of canvas the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> flew before the wind with inconceivable rapidity. It was necessary to keep up the greatest possible speed, for upon this alone depended her safety. Sometimes, outstripping the waves, she cut them with her slender prow and plunged beneath them, like an enormous sea-monster, while the water swept her deck from stem to stern. At other times her swiftness barely equaled that of the surges, her rudder lost all power, and she gave terrific lurches that threatened to capsize her. Then, impelled by the hurricane, the billows outran her; they leaped over the taffrail, and the whole deck was swept with tremendous violence.</p>
			<p>The situation was indeed alarming. The captain would not leave his post for an instant. He was tortured by fears that his impassive face would not betray, and persistently sought to penetrate with his gaze the gathering gloom. And he had good cause for fear. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, driven out of her course, was running towards the Australian coast with a swiftness that nothing could arrest. He felt, too, as if by instinct, that a strong current was drawing him along. At every moment he feared the shock of a reef upon which the yacht would be dashed into a thousand pieces, and he calculated that the shore was not more than a dozen miles to leeward.</p>
			<p>Finally he went in search of Lord Glenarvan, consulted with him in private, explained their actual situation, viewed it with the coolness of a sailor who is ready for any emergency, and ended by saying that he should be obliged perhaps to run the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> ashore.</p>
			<p>“To save those she carries, if possible, my lord,” he added.</p>
			<p>“Very well, captain,” replied Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“And Lady Helena and Miss Grant?”</p>
			<p>“I will inform them only at the last moment, when all hope is gone of keeping at sea. You will tell me.”</p>
			<p>“I will, my lord.”</p>
			<p>Glenarvan returned to the ladies, who, without knowing all the danger, felt it to be imminent. They displayed, however, a noble courage, equal at least to that of their companions. Paganel gave himself up to the most unreasonable theories concerning the direction of atmospheric currents, while the major awaited the end with the indifference of a Mussulman.</p>
			<p>About eleven o’clock the hurricane seemed to moderate a little, the heavy mists were gradually dissipated, and through the openings the captain could see a low land at least six miles to leeward. He steered directly for it. Huge waves rolled to a prodigious height, and he knew that they must have a firm point of support to reach such an elevation.</p>
			<p>“There are sandbars here,” said he to Tom Austin.</p>
			<p>“That is my opinion,” replied the mate.</p>
			<p>“We are in the hands of God,” continued the captain. “If He does not himself guide the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> over the bar, we are lost.”</p>
			<p>“It is high tide now, captain; perhaps we may do it.”</p>
			<p>“But see the fury of those waves! What ship could resist them? God help us, my friend!”</p>
			<p>Meantime the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> dashed towards the shore with terrible swiftness. Soon she was only two miles from the sandbars. The mists still continued to conceal the land. Nevertheless Captain Mangles thought he perceived, beyond this foaming barrier, a tranquil haven, where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> would be in comparative safety. But how to reach it?</p>
			<p>He called the passengers on deck, for he did not wish, when the hour of shipwreck had come, that they should be confined in the cabin. Glenarvan and his companions gazed at the awful sea. Mary Grant grew pale.</p>
			<p>“John,” said Glenarvan in a low tone to the young captain, “I will try to save my wife, or will perish with her. Do you take charge of Miss Grant.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, your lordship,” was the prompt reply.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was now only a few cable-lengths from the sandbars. As it was high tide, there would doubtless have been sufficient water to enable the yacht to cross these dangerous shoals; but the enormous waves upon which she rose and fell would infallibly have wrecked her. Was there then any means of allaying these billows, of calming this tumultuous sea?</p>
			<p>A sudden idea occurred to the captain.</p>
			<p>“The oil!” cried he; “pour on oil, men, pour on oil!”</p>
			<p>These words were quickly understood by all the crew. They were about to employ a method that sometimes succeeds. The fury of the sea can often be appeased by covering it with a sheet of oil, which floats on the surface and destroys the shock of the waters. The effect is instantaneous, but transient. As soon as a ship has crossed this treacherous sea, it redoubles its fury; and woe to those who would venture to follow.</p>
			<p>The barrels containing the supply of seal-oil were hoisted into the forecastle by the crew, to whom the danger gave new strength. Here they were stove in with a blow of the hatchet, and suspended over the starboard rattlings.</p>
			<p>“Hold on!” cried the captain, waiting for the favorable moment.</p>
			<p>In a few seconds the yacht reached the entrance to the pass, which was barred by a terrible line of foam.</p>
			<p>“Let go!” cried the young captain.</p>
			<p>The barrels were inverted, and from their sides streamed floods of oil. Immediately the unctuous liquid leveled the foaming surface of the sea, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> sailed on calm waters, and was soon in a quiet harbor beyond the terrible sandbars; and then the ocean, released from its fetters, bounded after its escaped prey with indescribable fury.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
